# MAuth Client

This project is hosted at https://github.com/mdsol/mauth-client. 

This gem consists of MAuth::Client, a class to manage the information needed to both sign and authenticate requests 
and responses, and middlewares for Rack and Faraday which leverage the client's capabilities. 

## Installation

Use the bundler gem. Add the following to your `Gemfile` in your global environment:

```
gem 'mauth-client', :git => "git@github.com:mdsol/mauth-client.git", :tag => 'v2.6.0'
```

Or, you may download the gem from https://github.com/mdsol/mauth-client/downloads and install it normally (that is, 
without bundler) with `gem install <downloaded filename>`

## Configuration

MAuth is typically configured by a yaml file, [mauth.yml](file.mauth.yml.html) - see its page for more documentation. 
This is simply loaded and passed to either middleware or directly to a MAuth::Client instance. See the documentation 
for [MAuth::Client#initialize][] for more details of what it accepts. Usually you will want:

```ruby
mauth_config = MAuth::Client.default_config
```

The `.default_config` method takes a number of options to tweak its expectations regarding defaults. See the 
documentation for [MAuth::Client.default_config][] for details.

The `private_key` and `app_uuid` (which go in mauth.yml) enable local authentication (see section 
[Local Authentication](#local-authentication) below). They’ll only work if the `app_uuid` has been stored in mAuth 
with a public key corresponding to the `private_key` in mauth.yml. 

If you do not have an app uuid and keypair registered with the mauth service, you can use mauth's remote request 
authentication by omitting those fields. MAuth-Client will make a call to MAuth for every request in order to 
authenticate remotely. Remote authentication therefore requires more time than local authentication. You will not 
be able to sign your responses without an app_uuid and private key, so `MAuth::Rack::ResponseSigner` cannot be used. 

The `mauth_baseurl` is required in mauth.yml. So is the `mauth_api_version` option. These tell the MAuth Client where 
and how to communicate with the MAuth service. See the [MAuth medinet page] for version information.

[MAuth::Client#initialize]: MAuth/Client.html#initialize-instance_method
[MAuth::Client.default_config]: TODO
[MAuth medinet page]: https://sites.google.com/a/mdsol.com/knowledgebase/home/departments/engineering/on-demand-portfolio/services/core-services/mauth

## Rack Middleware Usage

MAuth Client provides middleware for request authentication and response verification in mauth/rack. 

```ruby
require 'mauth/rack'
```

If you are using other rack middleware, MAuth middleware MUST come FIRST in the stack of middleware. This means it is 
closest to the HTTP layer, furthest from the application. If any other middlewares which modify the incoming request 
or outgoing response lie between the HTTP layer and the MAuth middleware(s), incoming requests will probably fail to 
authenticate, and outgoing response signatures will be invalid (and fail when the requester tries to authenticate 
them). 

Using these middlewares in rails consists of calls to `config.middleware.use` in the appropriate place (which varies 
among rails versions). 

For more information on using middleware in a Rails application, see http://guides.rubyonrails.org/rails_on_rack.html 

Using the `MAuth::Rack::ResponseSigner` middleware is optional, but highly recommended. If used, this should come 
before the `MAuth::Rack::RequestAuthenticator` middleware. The ResponseSigner can be used ONLY if you have an 
`app_uuid` and `private_key` specified in your mauth.yml. 

```ruby
config.middleware.use MAuth::Rack::ResponseSigner, mauth_config
```

Then request authentication:

```ruby
config.middleware.use MAuth::Rack::RequestAuthenticator, mauth_config
```

However, assuming you have a route `/app_status`, you probably want to skip request authentication for that. There is 
a middleware (`RequestAuthenticatorNoAppStatus`) to make that easier:

```ruby
config.middleware.use MAuth::Rack::RequestAuthenticatorNoAppStatus, mauth_config
```

You may want to configure other conditions in which to bypass MAuth authentication. The middleware takes an option 
on the `:should_authenticate_check` key, which is a ruby proc which is passed the request's rack env, and must result 
in a boolean. If the result is true(ish), the middleware will authenticate the incoming request; if false, it will 
not. The `:should_authenticate_check` parameter is OPTIONAL. If omitted, all incoming requests will be authenticated.

Here are a few example `:should_authenticate_check` procs:

```ruby
mauth_config[:should_authenticate_check] = proc do |env|
  env['REQUEST_METHOD'] == "GET"
end
config.middleware.use MAuth::Rack::RequestAuthenticator, mauth_config
```

Above, env is a hash of request parameters; this hash is generated by Rack.  The above proc will force the middleware 
to authenticate only GET requests.  Another example:

```ruby
mauth_config[:should_authenticate_check] = proc do |env|
  env['PATH_INFO'] == "/studies.json"
end
config.middleware.use MAuth::Rack::RequestAuthenticator, mauth_config
```

The above proc will force the rack middleware to authenticate only requests to the "/studies.json" path. To 
authenticate a group of related URIs, considered matching `env['PATH_INFO']` with one or more regular expressions. 

The configuration passed to the middlewares in the above examples (`mauth_config`) is used create a new instance of 
`MAuth::Client`. See the documentation for [MAuth::Client#initialize][] for more details of what configuration is 
accepted. If you are managing an MAuth::Client of your own for some reason, you can pass that in on the key 
`:mauth_client => your_client`, and omit any other MAuth::Client configuration. `:should_authenticate_check` is 
handled by the middleware and should still be specified alongside `:mauth_client`, if you are using it. 

When the request authentication middleware determines that a request is inauthentic, it will not call the 
application, and will respond with a 401 status code along with an error, expressed in JSON 
(Content-Type: application/json) with the value `{"errors": {"mauth": ["Unauthorized"]}}`. Successfully 
authenticated requests will be passed to the application, as will requests for which the 
`:should_authenticate_check` condition is false.

If the middleware is unable to authenticate the request because MAuth is unavailable and so cannot serve public 
keys, it responds with a 500 error, and an error expressed in JSON with the value 
`{"errors": {"mauth": ["Could not determine request authenticity"]}}`

## Examples:

Putting all this together, here is a typical example:

```ruby
mauth_config = MAuth::Client.default_config
require 'mauth/rack'
config.middleware.use MAuth::Rack::ResponseSigner, mauth_config
config.middleware.use MAuth::Rack:: RequestAuthenticatorNoAppStatus, mauth_config
```

In rails 3.0, this will go in a `Rails::Initializer.run do |config|` block in environment.rb. 

In rails 3.1, this goes in the `Application` class in application.rb. 

An example with a `should_authenticate_check`:

```ruby
mauth_config = MAuth::Client.default_config
require 'mauth/rack'
config.middleware.use MAuth::Rack::ResponseSigner, mauth_config
# authenticate all requests which pass the some_condition_of check and aren't /app_status with MAuth
mauth_config[:should_authenticate_check] = proc do |env|
  some_condition_of(env)
end
config.middleware.use MAuth::Rack:: RequestAuthenticatorNoAppStatus, mauth_config
```

## Fake middleware:

For testing purposes, you may wish to use middleware which does not perform actual authentication. MAuth provides 
this, as `MAuth::Rack::RequestAuthenticationFaker`. Requests are still checked for the presence of an MAuth 
signature - this is necessary as many applications rely on the `app_uuid` identified in the signature, so it cannot be 
ignored entirely. However, the validity of the public key is not checked in the MAuth service, and the authenticity of 
the request is not verified by its signature. 

This example code may augment the above examples to disable authentication in test mode:

```ruby
require 'mauth/fake/rack'
authenticator = Rails.env != "test" ? MAuth::Rack::RequestAuthenticator : MAuth::Rack::RequestAuthenticationFaker
config.middleware.use authenticator, mauth_config
```

## Faraday Middleware Usage

If you are making outgoing HTTP requests using Faraday, adding MAuth Faraday middleware is much the same as adding 
rack middleware. Building your connection will look like:

```ruby
Faraday.new(some_args) do |builder|
  builder.use MAuth::Faraday::RequestSigner, mauth_config
  builder.use MAuth::Faraday::ResponseAuthenticator, mauth_config
  builder.adapter Faraday.default_adapter
end
```

The Faraday middleware MUST come LAST in the stack of middleware. As with the rack middleware, this means it will be 
right next to the HTTP adapter. 

Only use the `MAuth::Faraday::ResponseAuthenticator` middleware if you are expecting the service you are 
communicating with to sign its responses (all services which are aware of MAuth _should_ be doing this).

`mauth_config` is the same as in Rack middleware, and as with the Rack middleware is used to initialize a 
`MAuth::Client` instance. Also as with the Rack middleware, you can pass in a `MAuth::Client` instance you are using 
yourself on the `:mauth_client` key, and omit any other configuration. 

Behavior is likewise similar to rack: if a `private_key` and `app_uuid` are specified, then ResponseAuthenticator 
will authenticate locally (see [Local Authentication](#local-authentication) below); if not, then it will go to the 
mauth service to authenticate. `MAuth::Faraday::RequestSigner` cannot be used without a `private_key` and `app_uuid`. 

If a response which does not appear to be authentic is received by the `MAuth::Faraday::ResponseAuthenticator` 
middleware, an exception `MAuth::InauthenticError` will be raised. 

If the mAuth service cannot be reached, and therefore the authenticity of a response cannot be verified by 
ResponseAuthenticator, then `MAuth::UnableToAuthenticateError` will be raised. 

## Other Request and Response signing

If you are not using Faraday, you will need to sign your own requests. 

Instantiate a `MAuth::Client` with the same configuration as the middlewares, as documented on 
[MAuth::Client#initialize]. We'll call this `mauth_client`. 

`mauth_client` has a method `#signed_headers` which takes either a `MAuth::Request` or `MAuth::Response` object, and 
generates HTTP headers which can be added to the request or response to indicate authenticity. Create a 
`MAuth::Request` object from the information in your HTTP request, whatever its form: 

```ruby
require 'mauth/request_and_response'
request = MAuth::Request.new(:verb => my_verb, :request_url => my_request_url, :body => my_body)
```
`mauth_client.signed_headers(request)` will then return mauth headers which you can apply to your request. 

## Local Authentication

When doing local authentication, the mauth client will periodically fetch and cache public keys from MAuth. Each 
public key will be cached locally for 60 seconds. Applications which connect frequently to the app will benefit 
most from this caching strategy. When fetching public keys from MAuth, the following rules apply:

1. If MAuth returns the public key for a given app_uuid, MAuth-Client will refresh its local cache with this new 
   public key.
2. If MAuth cannot find the public key for a given app_uuid (i.e. returns a 404 status code), MAuth-Client will 
   remove the corresponding public key from its local cache and authentication of any message from the application 
   with this public key will fail as a consequence.
3. If the request to MAuth times out or MAuth returns a 500 status code, the requested public key will not be removed 
   from local MAuth-Client cache (if it exists there in the first place). The cached version will continue to be used 
   for local authentication until MAuth::Client is able to again communicate with MAuth.

## Warning

During development, classes are typically not cached in Rails applications. If this is the case, be aware that the 
MAuth-Client middleware object will be instantiated anew for each request; this will cause applications performing 
local authentication to fetch public keys before each request is authenticated.
